CAMPAREE/doc/quick_start.rst, before:

Quick Start Guide
=================

This guide will walk you through basic installation and useage of CAMPAREE running a simulation on a simplified dataset consisting of a mouse genome truncated to about 6 million bases and two samples of reads that align there.

Installation
------------

Make sure you have the following installed on your system:
- git
- python version 3.6
- Java 1.8

Pull the git repo into a convenient location::

    git clone -b camparee git@github.com:itmat/BEERS2.0

Create a Python virtual environment to install required Python libraries to::

    cd BEERS2.0
    python3 -m venv ./venv_beers

and activate the environment::

    source ./venv_beers/bin/activate

Install required libraries::

    pip install -r requirements.txt

Install BEERS package in your Python environemtn::

    pip install .

Baby Genome
-----------

The "baby genome" is a truncated version of mm10 consisting of segments of length at most 1 million bases chosen from chromosomes 1, 2, 3, X, Y, and MT.

Create an STAR index for alignment to the baby genome::

    bin/create_star_index_for_baby_genome.sh

Perform Test Run
----------------

We are now ready to run CAMPAREE on a two small sample fastq files aligning to the baby genome.
If you have not aleady done so for installation, activate the python environment::
    source ./venv_beers/bin/activate

The default config file for the baby genome has CAMPAREE run all operations serially on a single machine.
To perform the test run with these defaults run::

    bin/run_camparee.py -c config/baby.config.yaml -r 1

The argument ``-r 1`` indicates that the run number is 1.
If you run this again, you must either remove the output directory ``_run1/`` or specify a new run number.

It is also possible to test deployment to a cluster.
For LSF clusters run::

    bin/run_camparee.py -c config/baby.config.yaml -r 1 -m lsf

For SGE clusters run::

    bin/run_camparee.py -c config/baby.config.yaml -r 1 -m sge

Check Results
-------------

When the run completes, output will be created in ``CAMPAREE/test_data/results/_run1/``.
The final outputs will be in the text files ``CAMPAREE/test_data/results/_run1/expression_pipeline/data/Test_Sample_1/molecule_file`` and  ``CAMPAREE/test_data/results/_run1/expression_pipeline/data/Test_Sample_2/molecule_file``.
Each line (after the header line) corresponds to a sequence of a single molecule in a tab-separated format.
The default config file outputs 10000 molecules.

Commit message:

Fix quick_start guide for camparee

CAMPAREE/doc/quick_start.rst, after:

Quick Start Guide
=================

This guide will walk you through basic installation and useage of CAMPAREE running a simulation on a simplified dataset consisting of a mouse genome truncated to about 6 million bases and two samples of reads that align there.

Installation
------------

Make sure you have the following installed on your system:
- git
- python version 3.6
- Java 1.8

Pull the git repo for CAMPAREE and BEERS_UTILS the into a convenient location::

    git clone git@github.com:itmat/CAMPAREE.git
    git clone git@github.com:itmat/BEERS_UTILS.git

Create a Python virtual environment to install required Python libraries to::

    cd CAMPAREE
    python3 -m venv ./venv_beers

And activate the environment::

    source ./venv_beers/bin/activate

Install required libraries::

    pip install -r requirements.txt

Install BEERS package in your Python environment::

    pip install -e .

Next, install the BEERS_UTILS package that CAMPAREE uses::

    pip install -e ../BEERS_UTILS

Note that we currently require the use of the ``-e`` flag during these installs, otherwise CAMPAREE will not run successfully.

Baby Genome
-----------

The "baby genome" is a truncated version of mm10 consisting of segments of length at most 1 million bases chosen from chromosomes 1, 2, 3, X, Y, and MT.

Create an STAR index for alignment to the baby genome::

    bin/create_star_index_for_baby_genome.sh

Perform Test Run
----------------

We are now ready to run CAMPAREE on a two small sample fastq files aligning to the baby genome.
If you have not aleady done so for installation, activate the python environment::

    source ./venv_beers/bin/activate

The default config file for the baby genome has CAMPAREE run all operations serially on a single machine.
To perform the test run with these defaults run::

    bin/run_camparee.py -c config/baby.config.yaml -r 1

The argument ``-r 1`` indicates that the run number is 1.
If you run this again, you must either remove the output directory ``_run1/`` or specify a new run number.

It is also possible to test deployment to a cluster.
For LSF clusters run::

    bin/run_camparee.py -c config/baby.config.yaml -r 1 -m lsf

For SGE clusters run::

    bin/run_camparee.py -c config/baby.config.yaml -r 1 -m sge

Check Results
-------------

When the run completes, output will be created in ``CAMPAREE/test_data/results/_run1/``.
The final outputs will be in the text files ``test_data/results/_run1/CAMPAREE/data/sample1/molecule_file`` and  ``test_data/results/_run1/CAMPAREE/data/sample2/molecule_file``.
Each line (after the header line) corresponds to a sequence of a single molecule in a tab-separated format.
The default config file outputs 10000 molecules.
